Introduction to GitHub and Version Control Tools
What is Version Control?

Version Control is a system that records changes to files over time so that you can recall specific versions later.
It helps developers collaborate on projects, track code changes, and manage different versions of software efficiently.

Benefits of Version Control:

Keeps track of every change in the project
Helps in collaboration among multiple developers
Allows rollback to previous versions
Avoids overwriting code
Provides backups and a history of all work





 Git

Git is an open-source, distributed version control system created by Linus Torvalds in 2005.
It allows every developer to have a full copy of the project history on their local system.

Main Features:

Distributed architecture (every user has the complete repository)

Fast branching and merging

Offline work capability

Tracks changes efficiently with commits

Common Git Commands:

git init → Initialize a repository

git add → Stage files

git commit → Save changes

git push → Upload to remote repository (like GitHub)

git pull → Fetch and merge updates






 Concurrent Versions System (CVS)

CVS is one of the earliest version control systems, developed in the 1980s.
It is a centralized version control system, meaning all files are stored in a central repository, and users check out files to make changes.

Features:

Centralized architecture

Simple and stable for small projects

Basic branching and merging support

Limitations:

Slower compared to modern tools

Limited support for atomic commits

Merging conflicts can be complex






Apache Subversion (SVN)

Apache Subversion (SVN) is an improved centralized version control system, developed as a successor to CVS.
It is widely used for managing source code and documentation.

Features:

Centralized repository model

Better performance than CVS

Supports atomic commits (either full commit or nothing)

Efficient handling of binary files

Access control and authentication features

Command Example:

svn checkout → Get a working copy

svn commit → Send changes to the server





 Mercurial

Mercurial is a distributed version control system similar to Git, designed for high performance and simplicity.
It is written in Python and is known for being easy to learn and use.

Features:

Distributed architecture (like Git)

Simple command structure

Fast and scalable for large projects

Supports branching and merging

Common Commands:

hg init → Initialize repository

hg add → Add files

hg commit → Record changes

hg push → Upload to remote repo